---
title: Measuring Predicates
date: 2014-08-01
authors: Alexis Wellwood
venue: University of Maryland linguistics dissertation
local: http://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/wellwood/downloadables/w2014diss.pdf
official: http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10988-015-9165-0
tags: semantics, comparatives, events
---

Determining  the  semantic  content  of  sentences,  and  uncovering  regularities
between linguistic form and meaning, requires attending to both morphological and
syntactic properties of a language with an eye to the notional categories that the
various pieces of form express. In this dissertation, I investigate the morphosyntactic
devices that English speakers (and speakers of other languages) can use to talk about
comparisons between things:  comparative sentences with, in English,
*more... than*, *as...   as*, *too*, *enough*, 
  and  others.   I  argue  that  a  core  component  of  all  of  these
constructions is a unitary element expressing the concept of measurement. READMORE 

The theory that I develop departs from the standard degree-theoretic analysis
of the semantics of comparatives in three crucial respects:  First, gradable adjectives
do  not  (partially  or  wholly)  denote  measure  functions;  second,  degrees  are  introduced compositionally; and three, the introduction of degrees arises uniformly from
the semantics of the expression *much*.  These ideas mark a return to the classic morphosyntactic analysis of comparatives found in Bresnan (1973), while incorporating
and extending semantic insights of Schwarzschild (2002, 2006).  Of major interest
is how the dimensions for comparison observed across the panoply of comparative
constructions vary,  and these are analyzed as a consequence of what is measured
(individuals, events, states, etc.), rather than which expressions invoke the measurement.

This shift in perspective leads to the observation of a number of regularities
in  the  mapping  between  form  and  meaning  that  could  not  otherwise  have  been
seen.  First, the notion of measurement expressed across comparative constructions
is familiar from some explications of that concept in measurement theory (e.g. Berka
1983).   Second,  the  distinction  between  gradable  and  non-gradable  adjectives  is
formally on a par with that between mass and count nouns, and between atelic and
telic verb phrases.  Third, comparatives are perceived to be acceptable if the domain
for measurement is structured, and to be anamolous otherwise.  Finally, elaborations
of grammatical form reflexively affect which dimensions for comparison are available
to interpretation.

