---
title: The anatomy of a comparative illusion
date: 2018-02-27
authors: Alexis Wellwood, Roumyana Pancheva, Valentine Hacquard, and Colin Phillips
venue: accepted for <i>Journal of Semantics</i>
local: /downloadables/wphp2018revision-june.pdf
tags: psycholinguistics, semantics, comparatives, events
---

Comparative constructions like <i>More people have been to Russia than I have</i> are reported to be acceptable and meaningful by native speakers of English; yet, upon closer reflection, they are judged to be incoherent. This mismatch between initial perception and more considered judgment challenges the idea that we perceive sentences veridically, and interpret them fully. It is thus potentially revealing about the relationship between grammar and language processing. This paper presents the results of the first detailed investigation of these so-called 'comparative illusions'. We test four hypotheses about their source: a shallow syntactic parser, some type of repair by ellipsis, an incorrectly-resolved lexical ambiguity, or a persistent event comparison interpretation. Two formal acceptability studies show that speakers are most prone to the illusion when the matrix clause supports an event comparison reading. A verbatim recall task tests and finds evidence for such construals in speakers' recollections of the sentences. We suggest that this reflects speakers' entertaining an interpretation that is initially consistent with the sentence, but failing to notice when this interpretation becomes unavailable at the than-clause. In particular, semantic knowledge blinds people to an illicit operator-variable configuration in the syntax. Rather than illustrating processing in the absence of grammatical analysis, comparative illusions thus underscore the importance of syntactic and semantic rules in sentence processing.

**Additional materials** related to the published experiments and our preliminary experiments can be found on [Github](https://github.com/alexiswellwood/compillu). 

<!-- **Supplemental material**: [Stimuli used for acceptability judgments, experiment 1](http://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/wellwood/downloadables/wphp2016accept-sentences.csv), [Stimuli used in sentence recall, experiment3](http://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/wellwood/downloadables/wphp2016recall-sentences.csv), [Summary report of preliminary experiments](http://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/wellwood/downloadables/wphp2016supplement.pdf) --> 
